you might think you know a lot about
Native Americans through popular movies
books and classes in school but it turns
out that a lot of what we think we know
about famous Native American figures
isn't quite right
take Sacagawea for example you probably
remember her as a beautiful Indian woman
who lived in exotic life serving as the
all-knowing guide for Lewis and Clark's
famous expedition right well that's not
exactly how it happened not much is
known about sacagawea's early childhood
but we do know that she was born in 1788
into the agay dekat tribe of the lemhi
shoshone and what is now Idaho in 1800
when she was about 12 years old
Sacagawea and several other girls were
kidnapped by a group of Hadassah Indians
she was taken as a captive to a Hadassah
village in present-day North Dakota then
she was sold to a French Canadian fur
trapper named Tucson shavano within a
year or so she was pregnant with their
first child soon after she became
pregnant the Corps of Discovery arrived
near the Hidatsa villages captain's
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark built
Fort Mandan there and then started
interviewing people to help guide them
on their perilous expedition they agreed
to hire sacagawea's husband Sean you
with the understanding that his lovely
wife would also come along as an
interpreter they figured her very
presence would help any encounters with
native tribes along the way as Clark
noted in his journal a woman with a
party of men is a token of peace shortly
thereafter Sacagawea gave birth to a
little boy named jean-baptiste Shah Bano
Clark called him Pompey she carried
Pompey on a board strapped to her back
as the Corps of Discovery forged on
besides interpreting the language when
Lewis and Clark encountered Indians
sacagawea's activities as a member of
the Corps included digging for roots
collecting edible plants and picking
berries in 1805 the boat they were
riding in was capsized she dove into the
water recovering all the important
papers and supplies that would otherwise
have been lost including the journals
and records of Lewis and Clark
later that year captain Lewis and three
men scouted seventy-five miles ahead of
the expedition's main party crossing the
Continental Divide the next day they
encountered a group of Shoshones not
only do they prove to be sacagawea's Bay
but their leader chief Cameahwait turned
out to be her very own brother after
five years of separation since her
kidnapping as a young girl Sacagawea and
Cameahwait had an emotional reunion
unfortunately she quickly had to bid
farewell to her beloved brother and
continue on with a journey at one point
the expedition became so difficult and
freezing the group was reduced to eating
candles to survive when temperatures
finally became more bearable Sacagawea
found Doug and cooked roots to help the
group regain their strength on the
return trip they encountered an Indian
wearing a beautiful fur robe Lewis and
Clark wanted to bring the robe to Thomas
Jefferson as a gift but had nothing to
trade for it so Sacagawea agreed to
trade her most precious possession her
beaded belt for the fur a little over
two years after the expedition began it
was finally over ending in st. Louis
today we learn about Sacagawea in school
as a heroic guide but her life like most
everyone's was much more complicated
than history books sometimes give her
credit for
Oh